Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
FAST EXPLORATION WITH SIMPLIFIED MODELS AND APPROXIMATELY OPTIMISTIC PLANNING IN MODELBASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review
ABSTRACT
Humans learn to play video games significantly faster than the state-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. People seem to build simple models that are easy to learn to support planning and strategic exploration. Inspired by this, we investigate two issues in leveraging model-based RL for sample efficiency. First we investigate how to perform strategic exploration when exact planning is not feasible and empirically show that optimistic Monte Carlo Tree Search outperforms posterior sampling methods. Second we show how to learn simple deterministic models to support fast learning using object representation. We illustrate the benefit of these ideas by introducing a novel algorithm, Strategic Object Oriented Reinforcement Learning (SOORL), that outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms in the game of Pitfall! in less than 50 episodes.
1 INTRODUCTION
The coupling of deep neural networks and reinforcement learning has led to exciting advances, enabling reinforcement learning agents that can reach human-level performance in many Atari2600 games (Mnih et al., 2015; 2016; Silver et al., 2017; Hessel et al., 2017). However, such agents typically require hundreds of millions of time steps to learn to play well. This is in sharp contrast to people, who typically learn to play Atari games within a few episodes (Lake et al., 2017). Prior work on human learning for Atari suggests that people may be systematically building models of the reward and dynamics in the domain and using those to plan efficiently (Tsividis et al., 2017; Dubey et al., 2018).
Given that human learners seemingly perform model-based RL very quickly, we are motivated to consider alternative approaches to current model-based RL, which often involves building complex predictive deep neural networks from scratch. Deep neural networks can require a large amount of data to accurately train, and performing perfect planning with those models is computationally expensive. Indeed, while there is a considerable amount of theoretical work done on tabular modelbased reinforcement learning that suggests model-based approaches can be provably sample efficient (Dann et al., 2017; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Strehl & Littman, 2008), there is much less success in using model-based reinforcement learning in extremely large environments, in part due to the challenges of learning simple accurate models in these domains.
Instead, in this paper, we investigate two issues in leveraging model-based RL to speed learning in large domains. First we explore how to perform approximate planning using models during model-based RL to support exploration, assuming models are given. Models can facilitate deep exploration, since one key benefit of using models is that it is often easier to quantify uncertainty in those models, and perform planning in a way to guide the agent towards exploring and reducing that uncertainty. Recent work has suggested the benefit of Thompson Sampling methods over optimism methods for reinforcement learning (Osband & Van Roy, 2016), and, indeed, empirically Thompson Sampling methods have done very well in contextual bandits and small state space MDPs where it is possible to plan exactly. However, to our knowledge, there has not been an investigation of how these popular approaches scale to larger domains where it is computationally prohibitive to perform exact planning. We introduce optimistic MCTS, a variant of the popular planning technique Monte
1

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019

Carlo Tree Search, and find that optimism here outperforms other approaches in several simulation experiments when planning can only be done approximately.
Second, while our first investigation explores how to plan to encourage exploration given a model, we further investigate how to choose the model class to support computational tractability and learning efficiency. Here we propose to learn object-oriented deterministic models of the domain. People may leverage and test models of object interactions during video game learning (Tsividis et al., 2017; Dubey et al., 2018), and object-oriented learning has the nice benefit that data from all similar objects can be pooled when building a model. Prior work has shown that object-oriented model-based reinforcement learning can yield provably efficient learning and scale to larger domains (Diuk et al., 2008). Deterministic models offer an additional benefit over object-oriented models­they require less data to train (since one does not have to model a large stochastic distribution of outcomes) and they have additional benefits for planning, reducing the branching factor of next states to 1. Indeed past work (Diuk et al., 2008) also proposed learning deterministic object-oriented models. In contrast, we investigate how to learn the transition model and temporal abstraction to make the world appear deterministic. In other words, we assume a candidate set of possible transition model classes and temporal abstractions, and perform model selection to select a level of temporal abstraction and model that deterministically predicts the outcome of an action.
We illustrate the potential benefit of these ideas by introducing an object oriented algorithm that uses prior knowledge of model classes and object representation, and show that our algorithm can learn to achieve positive reward in the notoriously difficult Atari game Pitfall! within 50 episodes. Almost no RL methods have achieved positive reward on Pitfall! without human demonstrations, and even with demonstrations, such approaches often take hundreds of millions of frames to learn (Aytar et al., 2018; Hester et al., 2017). In contrast to demonstrations, we assume two forms of prior knowledge­a predefined object representation and a class of potential model features. Computer vision is rapidly advancing to the state that soon we will be able to easily extract objects from even artificial scenes like the Arcade Learning Environment. The second assumption of candidate model classes is a stronger assumption, but a large set of models could be defined directly given the object classes and only incur a cost quadratic in the set of features.
While encouraging, such results should be mostly viewed as a case study. We believe the key contributions of our paper are not this particular demonstration on Pitfall!, but rather the investigation of exploration approaches when planning can only be done approximately, and the benefit of selecting among model representations to support computationally tractable planning and fast learning. The second can be viewed as a bias/variance tradeoff and in future work we plan to consider how to identify and account for model biases that could limit asymptotic performance during the model-based planning procedure.

2 PRELIMINARIES

We consider a finite horizon Markov Decision Process (MDP) S, A, T, R,  , where S is the state

space, A the action space, T : S × A  S the transition function, R : S × A  R the reward

function, and  the discount factor. The goal of the RL agent is to maximize the expected discounted

reward E[

T t=0

tR(st,

at)]

following

a

policy

.

3 APPROXIMATE MODEL-BASED PLANNING TO SUPPORT EXPLORATION

Computing an optimal policy for a Markov decision process in a large state space can be extremely computationally expensive, if not impossible. Therefore some form of approximate planning procedure is almost always needed for large scale domains. Especially in model-based RL algorithms when the transition and reward models are initially unknown and should be learned online , a computationally tractable planning algorithm is more critical. Since the model estimates are changing and one should plan more frequently with the new model estimates.
One popular and powerful approach for scaling up planning for large Markov decision processes is Monte Carlo Tree Search (Chaslot et al., 2008; Browne et al., 2012), which has been used to achieve better than world class performance in Go (Silver et al., 2016). When a perfect transition and reward model is known, MCTS is guaranteed to converge to the optimal value function in the limit of infinite

2

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019

Method Optimism Thompson Sampling BAMCP

Number of Episdoes 5.0 ± 1.7

6.2 ± 1.95

11.0 ± 2.5

Table 1: Comparison of different exploration methods in mini-Pitfall! to consistently achieve the reward at the right end of the first room.

1.5 1.0  1.0
1.5
(a) Pong Prime environment

Cumulative Score Cumulative Score

200 150 100 50
0 50 100 150
0

Optimal Baseline Optimism Thompson Sampling BAMCP

123 Time Step

4 ×104

200 150 100 50
0 50 100
0.0

Optimal Baseline 5 simulations 10 simulations 20 simulations 50 simulations 100 simulations 0.5 Tim1e.0Step 1.5

2.0 ×104

(b) Different exploration methods (c) Optimism based exploration

Figure 1: Pong Prime

computation (i.e. infinite number of rollouts). However, when a model is estimated from the data and computational power is bounded, prior works has suggested how to adjust planning horizon to get the best computational performance (Jiang et al., 2015). As of our knowledge there is no work that additionally investigate the performance of different exploration methods with approximate planning.
We are interested in how to leverage models to support deep efficient exploration in large domains. Prior research has strong guarantees to find a near optimal policy with deep exploration when exact planning can be done, often in small state space (Brunskill et al., 2009; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002). In contrast, in this work, we investigate how to leverage models to support deep exploration when exact planning is not possible (large state space).
We propose a new optimistic MCTS to support deep exploration guided by models. Particularly, we suggest to perform a MCTS algorithm (e.g. UCT (Kocsis & Szepesva´ri, 2006)), and use the learned reward R and transition model T that is optimistic toward unseen or less frequently seen part of the state-action space (we further discuss how to learn simple models for planning in section 4). Concretely, while performing rollouts using learned models at each step an optimistic reward bonus is given. Optimistic reward bonus can be given by any optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) algorithm (e.g. MBIE-EB (Strehl & Littman, 2008) or Rmax (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002)).
Optimistic MCTS may have some advantages over alternate ways to achieve deep exploration in large state spaces given limited computation. In particular optimistic MCTS is leveraging model uncertainty to drive deep exploration, in contrast to policy search methods with simulated models (Sutton et al., 2000) that relies on the stochasticity of the policy for exploration and it is unclear how to leverage model uncertainty.
Additionally, MCTS with posterior sampling methods, like Thompson Sampling (Thompson, 1933) (by sampling a model from posterior distribution and performing rollouts) has strong guarantees when exact planning can be done, might not be optimistic enough for efficient exploration. With limited number of rollouts, agent might not observe the optimistic part of the model, in contrast to optimistic MCTS where optimism is built into every node of the tree.
To investigate the impact of approximate planning on deep exploration, we compare optimistic MCTS, with Thomson Sampling, and BAMCP (Guez et al., 2012) (a tractable sample-based method for approximate Bayes-optimal planning) in two toy domains, Pong Prime and mini-Pitfall!.
3

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
3.1 EXPERIMENTS
In order to test our hypotheses on the impact of imperfect model-based planning on deep exploration we introduced two toy environments, PongPrime and mini-Pitfall! that are similar to general Atari games but in smaller scale. Pong Prime environment is designed for a hard exploration task. Dynamics of this game is similar to Atari2600's Pong environment (Bellemare et al., 2013) with minor tweaks that make the game significantly harder. The enemy paddle is made 3 times larger than the player paddle. Additionally, the top and bottom 10% percent of the enemy paddle hit the ball back at 1.5 times the normal speed. Similarly, the player paddle also consists of 3 regions with distinct behavior. The top region of the paddle hits the ball back at 1.5 times speed. The middle region hits the ball back at normal speed. Finally, the lower region covers 5% of the paddle and instantly wins a point for the player. This configuration is set up so that it is difficult but not impossible for the player to score using the top region (scoring on average around 5% of the time the ball bounces off the top region). In this setting, the optimal policy is to always hit the ball with the lower region of the ball. The game is deterministic and model free methods with -greedy exploration (e.g. DQN) consistently loses the game with lowest possible score across 5000 episodes. Figure1(a) shows this environment.
mini-Pitfall! is a small version of Atari2600 game Pitfall! which we use as a final test bed of our algorithm. In this version we limit the agent to two rooms of the game (the initial room, room 0, that agents starts the game in, and the room on the left side, room -1). There exist a dummy reward Rmax at the right end of the room 0, and the left end of room -1 is a terminal state (underground connection is also terminal state). Figure 2(a) shows this environment.
We provided the right model class for both experiments so we can separate the effect of exploration from model mismatch. Figure 1(b) compares the performance of different exploration strategies to the baseline (which uses a MLE model with UCT algorithm) combining with UCT algorithm in Pong Prime domain. We perform 500 total tree searches for all runs in Figure 1(b). Additionally, Table 1 shows the performance of different exploration methods in achieving the reward on the right side of the room 0 in mini-Pitfall! consistently.
3.2 DISCUSSION
Both BAMCP and TS perform worse than the MLE model. In the limit of infinite simulations, BAMCP is guaranteed to converge to the Bayes optimal solution (Guez et al., 2012). Similarly, with full horizon planning, we should be able to compute the exact value for the model sampled with TS, and there are strong guarantees that such a method will converge to the optimal policy (Osband & Van Roy, 2016). However, if it is infeasible to use a depth that mimics the game horizon, or perhaps even to reach a local reward, then TS may suffer. This is because TS samples a single model, which means that parts of the model may be overly optimistic, while other parts may be pessimistic. Hence, when performing a limited number of simulations using UCT, we may not go down branches of the tree that observe the optimistic parts of the sampled model. Therefore, the computed estimates of the Q value at the root node may not be optimistic, which is often a key part of proofs of the effectiveness of TS methods, and very helpful empirically.
Additionally, BAMCP suffers more in these environments that are deterministic. This means that for TS, optimism, and MLE approaches, the tree constructed will only have one child node (the deterministic next state) for any chosen action. In contrast, BAMCP samples a different deterministic model at each rollout, and for the same action node, those models may each deterministically predict different next states. Hence, BAMCP with M sampled models and planning horizon H, potentially builds a tree of size O((|A|M )H ), in contrast to the other methods that build a tree of at most size O(|A|H ), where |A| is the size of action space.
Optimism-based exploration significantly outperforms other approaches. Optimism is built into every node of the three that is allowing it to distinguish even locally between actions that may need exploration, in absence of observing long delayed reward. As we demonstrate in Figure 1(c) for the optimistic method, as planning power increases through more simulations (number of rollouts), the performance of optimism-based exploration also increases. With sufficient computational power, optimistic MCTS should learn the optimal policy for Pong Prime domain.
4

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019

Total Entropy of models Total Entropy of models

2.0 1.5 "#$ 1.0

Total Entropy Threshhold

0.5

(a) mini Pitfall!

20 30 Total Number of NoOps

40

(b) Total Entropy of Models

Jump Right
1.0 Right
Down Threshhold
0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2 0

2468 Number of NoOps

(c) Per Action Entropy of Agent's Model

10

Figure 2: Macro actions

4 APPROXIMATELY DETERMINISTIC MODEL TO SUPPORT FAST LEARNING
In the previous section we considered how to plan and perform deep exploration given a transition and reward models. Now we ask a natural question, what types of model to learn?, and how these models will affect computational tractability of planning and sample efficient learning? In general simpler models are easier to learn and requires less data to train, in contrast to complex function approximation methods that often requires massive amount of data and suffer from compounding errors in lookahead planning (Roderick et al., 2017; Weber et al., 2017). Additionally, simple models are tractable to perform deep exploration with model uncertainty and reduce planning time.
There are reasonable evidence that humans learns a simple model, often inaccurate, to support planning and guide decision making (Tsividis et al., 2017; Dubey et al., 2018). In particular, people seem to benefit from higher level object representations that allows them to factor a high dimensional state space into simple low dimensional object states, this allows human to generalize from few examples, explore and plan efficiently. Additionally, as discussed in section 3.2, deterministic models can significantly help in planning and deep exploration, due to smaller branching factor of the tree (each state node will have only one child per action). Inspired by humans and prior works on object oriented MDP (Diuk et al., 2008) we hypothesize that object oriented models can help us learn a simple, easy and approximately deterministic models that are sufficient for planning .
Object detection has been long studied in computer vision, and state-of-the-art algorithms can detect objects with great accuracy in real world scenes (e.g. YoLo (Redmon & Farhadi, 2017), fast RCNN (Girshick, 2015) mask RCNN (He et al., 2017) and . . . ). We expect that these algorithms can simply detect objects and their bounding boxes, when they are trained on Atari2600. Thus, here we assume objects are given, in section 4.2 we discuss how to learn a simple model and further in section 4.3 we show how temporal abstraction can help learning an approximately deterministic mode.
4.1 REVIEW OF OBJECT ORIENTED MDP
We use a simpler version of OOMDP (Diuk et al., 2008). we define a set of object classes C = {c1, . . . , cn} where each class has a set of attributes {c.a1, . . . , c.am}. Each state s consists of objects f (s) = {o1, . . . , ok} where each object oi  C. The state of an object is defined by the value assignment to its attributes. Finally, the state s of the underlying MDP is the union of all object states ik=1oi.
We define the interaction function I : O × O  {0, 1} to be an indicator that determines if two objects are interacting with each other. For simplicity, we make three assumptions: first, that this interaction function is known; second, objects from the same class share the same transition function; and third, each object's next state is dependent on at most pairwise object interactions and action. An object's successor state is determined by a standalone transition function Tc(o, a) or a pairwise transition function Tci,cj (oi, oj, a) if I(oi, oj) = 1.
5

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019

Model Entropy

1.2 1.0

Crocodile dh Scorpion dx

0.8 0.6

Tarpit dw Vine dx Rolling Log dx

0.4

0.2

0.0
21 Histo2ry3 Size 25

(a) Model entropy

5 TF Die Live
High Entropy

5 TF x > 5 Live TF Live Die
Zero Entropy

Left
5 TF

 Center
5 TF

Right
5 TF

x > 5 Live TF

x > 5 Live TF

x > 5 Live TF

Live Die

Live Die

Live Die

Zero Entropy, Overspecified Model

(b) Example trained models

Figure 3: Model selection

4.2 MODEL LEARNING

Given that we are planning at an object level, we hypothesize that even simple models, such as linear and discrete count based models, give sufficient accuracy for planning, since often objects follow a very simple physical laws. More importantly, to ensure "sufficient accuracy in planning", we further require that these models predict transitions and rewards in a deterministic fashion.

To ensure deterministic transitions, we consider the class of functions Ft = {ft1, . . . , ftn}, where each fti is a count-based model of the dynamics for an object. Each function stores the count of every output based on a different set of input features with given history t. The simplest model in F1 is f11, which uses one history with null input. For example, for a falling object with steady state velocity,
such a model is sufficient as we can predict displacement x and y without any input. On the other hand, f1n, which uses one history and the most complex set of features, is the most complicated model in the class F1. In terms of objects, the most complex set of input features that we consider is the union of the object's state features, relative state features with respect to an interacting object,
and action.

The goal then is to choose the simplest model that achieves deterministic transitions within

Ft. To do so, we compute the entropy of the observed data for each function H(ftk) =

- plest

xi p(xi) log(p(xi|ftk)) where model that has entropy less

the summation is over all the than a predefined threshold

observed data. We choose the siment. If none of the models in Ft

satisfy the entropy threshold, we increase t through an exponential back off scheme. Concretely, we

increase the history to the next exponent of 2. We use the same approach and same class of models

for reward functions.

Figure 3(a) shows an example for the game Pitfall!, where we used a Cartesian product of object size (w, h), object location (x, y) and object intersection (x , y ) as features. Ignoring null input, this Cartesian product results in 7 different feature sets. With sufficient history, the entropy of all the models eventually drops to zero.

4.3 TEMPORAL ABSTRACTION
As we observed in our experiments, objects transitions, especially action-dependent transitions, can show a highly nonlinear behaviour and dependency to multiple time step histories. Inspired by human's reaction time and previous work (Diuk et al., 2008) we use the notion of macro action in the form of "act and then wait" in order to learn a simple approximately deterministic transition models.
Algorithm 1 shows the pseudo code to learn the macro actions from a predefined set of atomic actions (e.g. in the simplest form it can be the action space of the desired MDP; however, one can define them as any n-token combination of actions). In algorithm 1 we augment all atomic actions with k number of no-op or wait, and then greedily decrease the number of no-ops followed by each action such that all model's can deterministically predict the next object state. The goal is to have a

6

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
model that achieves deterministic transition, to do so we measure the entropy of model's prediction with the observed data as in section 4.2.
Algorithm 1: Macro Actions Input: maximum number of no-op k, set of atomic actions A macro actions  atomic action followed by maximum number of no-op; mark all macro action as reducible; while there exist a reducible macro action do
a select a reducible macro action and decrease number of no-op by one;   compute entropy of model's prediction with new set of macro actions; if   thresh then
mark a as non reducible macro action and restore the number of no-op for a; end end
Figure 2(b) shows the total entropy of model's versus total number of no-op in Pitfall! environment. As algorithm progress entropy increases to pass the threshold. Figure 2 (c) shows the entropy of agent's models while reducing number of no-op for one action and keeping others constant. As it shows Jump Right requires 8, Down requires 4 and Right requires none no-op afterward to achieves a deterministic transition for all actions. Running this algorithm in Pong Prime environment results in two no-op after each action, since the real dynamics uses 3 step history.
5 SOORL: STRATEGIC OBJECT ORIENTED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
In this section we put together the insights from previous sections and propose a novel model-based object oriented RL algorithm, Strategic Object Oriented RL (SOORL). SOORL assumes access to an object detector, that returns a list of objects with their attributes (i.e. location and bounding box), an interaction function and macro actions (that can be learned with algorithm 1).
Algorithm 2 shows a pseudo code of SOORL. At each step, SOORL performs lookahead planning with UCT algorithm, learn and select appropriate transition and reward models for object representation and performs optimism based exploration.
Algorithm 2: SOORL Input: object detector f (s), lookahead planning depth d, number of rollouts l initialize; for each episode e do
train value function V on replay buffer D; for each step i do
oi  detect objects with object detector f (si); Q(si, a)  perform lookahead planning with depth d and l rollouts; take action ai = argmaxQ(s, .) and update replay buffer D = D  (oi, ai, oi+1, ri); update transition and reward models with (oi, ai, oi+1, ri)
Model Learning: SOORL uses the method described in section 4.2 with Cartesian product of object size (w, h), object location (x, y) and object intersection (x , y ) as features. Ignoring null input, this Cartesian product results in 7 different feature sets.
Exploration: Count based models allow SOORL to efficiently perform the knows what it knows (KWIK) (Li et al., 2008) scheme for exploration (optimistic MCTS). Concretely, if our algorithm queries the transition or reward model with a previously unseen input, we consider the resulting state as a state with Rmax reward. Rmax reward is also considered for any previously unseen object interactions. As we observe the reward for each interaction we update the reward model based on model-based interval estimation (Strehl & Littman, 2008).
7

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019

Planning: At the beginning of each episode, a value function is trained based on previously seen transitions and rewards. Value function V : O  R is trained over object states and can generally be any function approximation methods.
Lookahead planning is performed by UCT (Kocsis & Szepesva´ri, 2006) algorithm with l rollouts and depth d. Algorithm 3 shows pseudo code of planning, at each planning step, SOORL computes object interactions, selects appropriate models based on interactions and object states then predicts rewards and next object state. At depth d of planning SOORL uses value of the object state V (od) trained at the beginning of each episode.

Algorithm 3: Lookahead Planning

Input: objects o, depth d, rollouts l, value function V for number of rollouts l do
set current depth i to zero; while i  d do
if i == d then update Q values with V (oi); break;

detect interactions Ii with objects oi and select models T, R;

take action ai = argmaxQ(si, a) + c

logN (s,a) N (s)

;

obtain next object state oi+1 and reward ri with R(oi, Ii), T (oi, Ii) and update Q;

6 EMPIRICAL EVALUATION
In this section we will evaluate SOORL on an Atari game Pitfall!. SOORL assumes access to an object detector, a predefined set of function classes and macro action (that can be learned using algorithm described in section 4.3).
Labeled data for object's in Atari game in not available, and in our experiment we extracted the objects from Atari RAM and screen information. The need for an object detector makes engineering burden of SOORL prohibitive to test the algorithm on all Atari games. Thus we focused on one of the hardest game (sparse reward and hard exploration (Bellemare et al., 2016)), Pitfall!, where all the previous methods (without human demonstrations) failed to achieve any positive reward. We showed that object representation can be extremely helpful in this hard exploration game and SOORL can achieve a positive reward in Pitfall! without human demonstration.
Pitfall! is an Atari2600 environment where the goal is to have the agent traverse through multiple rooms (255 in total) while collecting rewards and avoiding obstacles. It is arguably one of the hardest Atari2600 game (Hester et al., 2017) due to its large map, sparse positive and dense negative rewards that necessitate deep exploration and long-horizon planning. The -greedy exploration strategy completely fails in this environment, and more recent count-based exploration (Bellemare et al., 2016) does not show much performance boost due to the sparsity of positive reward. Pitfall is difficult even for human players without prior knowledge of the game ­ (Hester et al., 2017) reports that human performance varies from 3662 to 47821 points, whereas for other hard Atari games, this variation is much smaller (e.g. from 32300 to 34900 for Montezuma's revenge).
6.1 DETAILS
All objects information are extracted from RAM and screen information, and each object's attribute is location (x, y) and bounding box size (w, h). Objects are considered interacting with each other if bounding boxes collide. Transition and reward models for each object are based on the method described in Section 4.2. The features used are a Cartesian product of object size (w, h), object location (x, y) and object intersection (x , y ). Ignoring null input, this Cartesian product results in 7 different feature sets.
8

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019

Number of Room Discovered Reward
percentage of runs that got a positive reward

25
20
15
10
5 average total
0 0 10 20 30 40 50 Episodes
(a) Room Discovery

1500

SOORL

1000

DQfD Count Based

DQN

500 A3C

0

500

1000 0

10 20 30 40 Episodes

(b) Reward per episode

50

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0 35 40 45 50 Episodes
(c) Percentage of runs that got positive reward

Figure 4: performance of SOORL on Pitfall!

As described in section 3 we used optimism based exploration method, by assigning reward Rmax to all unseen interactions and transitions. As we observe reward for each interaction we update the model, based on model based interval estimation (Strehl & Littman, 2008). Additionally in order to further incentivize exploration we split the screen into N × M grids and keeping a count of the number of times agent visits each grid. The agent is given a reward bonus n(s)-1/2 based on visit count n(s).
For value function, we used discrete object's location with the same split used for optimism bonus, and computed the empirical transition T^(o |o, a) and empirical reward with optimism bonus r^(o, a) + n(s)-1/2, and at the beginning of each episode, we performed value iteration.
6.2 PERFORMANCE AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4(a) shows an increasing number of rooms being discovered across episodes. On average, the agent discovers 21 rooms within 50 episodes, and in total across 20 runs the agent discovers 27 different rooms. This validates our hypothesis that optimistic MCTS drives deep exploration, that we also showed in a smaller domains in section 3.
Figure 4(b) shows accumulative reward for each episode of SOORL and compares them to the other state of the art algorithm. Results of count-based (Bellemare et al., 2016), DQfD (Hester et al., 2017), A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) and DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) are reported at the time of evaluation. Our average score across all episodes and all runs is -193.5 ± 595.8 and SOORL score for the best episode across all runs in 606.6 ± 1254.5, which is higher than all scores that were reported at the time of evaluation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first approach which manages to get positive rewards on Pitfall! without human demonstrations. Sample videos of the agent reaching the two closest positive rewards can be found here: https://youtu.be/GvenPZMJiTg (4000 reward) https://youtu.be/74F-ta5LyuA (2000 reward)
Figure 4 (c) shows the percentage of runs that got a positive reward. More than 80% of runs got a positive reward in 50 episodes that shows consistency of our approach across multiple runs. Due to simple dynamics model that can be learned fast SOORL is extremely sample efficient in comparison to other deep RL method that often takes millions of frame to find a good policy. However, end-toend deep RL methods use significantly less prior knowledge and using raw pixels as input, thus a direct comparison with them is unfair. We have also provided macro actions and object information for DQN and DDQN but those methods are not designed to take advantage of object representation and did not show a boost in performance. On the other hand, SOORL uses much less prior knowledge than methods with human demonstration (Aytar et al., 2018; Hester et al., 2017), where human guidance enormously reduce the challenge of exploration.
Additionally, macro actions are provided for SOORL, but as shown in section 4.3 these can be learned online. Integrating this temporal abstraction with SOORL can increase the sample complexity by O(|A|K), where K is the maximum number of no-ops.
9

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
7 RELATED WORK
Model based RL has accomplished great success in tasks in which a perfect simulator is known (Silver et al., 2016; 2017), mostly using Monte Carlo Tree Search algorithms like UCT (Kocsis & Szepesva´ri, 2006; Chaslot, 2010). Recent work has focused on applying deep learning to modelbased RL by learning the model online (Rosin, 2011; Finn & Levine, 2017; Lenz et al., 2015; Weber et al., 2017). In contrast to these methods, we seek to learn a simple model based on object representation.
Exploration has been extensively studied in the tabular setting (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Strehl & Littman, 2008; Jaksch et al., 2010; Osband & Van Roy, 2016). However, these methods do not scale well to large MDPs and often result in poor sample complexity. Additionally, these methods assume exact planning that might not be feasible in large state space. Recent approaches (Bellemare et al., 2016; Ostrovski et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2017) proposed an extension of count based exploration to large MDPs. Despite good asymptotic performance, when compared with humans (Tsividis et al., 2017; Lake et al., 2017), these methods require orders of magnitude more samples.
Bayesian RL methods also provide an effective balance between exploration and exploitation (Ghavamzadeh et al., 2015). When exact planning is possible, they provide strong guarantees. However, these methods remain computationally intractable in large state spaces. Recent works propose an extension of these methods to large MDPs (Osband et al., 2016; Azizzadenesheli et al., 2018; Fortunato et al., 2017). However, these methods are unable to show substantial improvement in hard exploration, sparse reward environments.
A closely related line of research, finite horizon planning (Kearns et al., 2002; Mannor et al., 2007; Kearns et al., 1994), has noted how planning horizon can affect planning loss (Kearns & Singh, 2002; Strehl et al., 2009). Recent study has shown that shorter planning horizons might be better when there is model inaccuracy (Jiang et al., 2015). In contrast, in this work, we studied how imperfect planning can affect exploration.
OOMDP (Diuk et al., 2008) defines a notion borrowed from relational MDPs (Guestrin et al., 2003), and uses objects to learn models and perform model based planning. Model free methods that use object representation (Garnelo et al., 2016; Roderick et al., 2017; Cobo et al., 2013) fail to scale to large MDPs and do not leverage object representation for deep exploration. The main difference between our approach and other object oriented approaches is that we perform scalable planning with strategic exploration by leveraging objects to learn simple dynamics models.
8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
To conclude, we showed how we can achieve a sample efficient RL algorithm with object priors. We proposed optimistic MCTS as a way to drive deep exploration when exact planning is impossible, and showed this to be more effective than posterior sampling methods. Additionally, we investigate how approximately deterministic simple models can be learned with object representation to support fast learning and planning.
We introduced Strategic Object Oriented RL (SOORL) that uses object representation and optimistic MCTS with automatic model selection that biases towards simple deterministic models. SOORL achieves state of the art results in the game of Pitfall!. While there remains works to be done to reduce the engineering burden of SOORL, lookahead planning with object representation is a very promising path towards more sample efficient RL algorithms.
A very important line of future research is robust planning. One important challenge in modelbased RL is making planning robust to model inaccuracy. Identifying the right model class is a nontrivial task, and a wrong model class can easily introduce a catastrophic error in long-horizon prediction that prohibits the use of tree search algorithms like UCT.
REFERENCES
Yusuf Aytar, Tobias Pfaff, David Budden, Tom Le Paine, Ziyu Wang, and Nando de Freitas. Playing hard exploration games by watching youtube. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11592, 2018.
10

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Emma Brunskill, and Animashree Anandkumar. Efficient exploration through bayesian deep q-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04412, 2018.
Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1471­1479, 2016.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47: 253­279, 2013.
Ronen I Brafman and Moshe Tennenholtz. R-max-a general polynomial time algorithm for nearoptimal reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Oct):213­231, 2002.
Cameron B Browne, Edward Powley, Daniel Whitehouse, Simon M Lucas, Peter I Cowling, Philipp Rohlfshagen, Stephen Tavener, Diego Perez, Spyridon Samothrakis, and Simon Colton. A survey of monte carlo tree search methods. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in games, 4(1):1­43, 2012.
Emma Brunskill, Bethany R Leffler, Lihong Li, Michael L Littman, and Nicholas Roy. Provably efficient learning with typed parametric models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10(Aug): 1955­1988, 2009.
Guillaume Chaslot, Sander Bakkes, Istvan Szita, and Pieter Spronck. Monte-carlo tree search: A new framework for game ai. In AIIDE, 2008.
Guillaume Maurice Jean-Bernard Chaslot Chaslot. Monte-carlo tree search. PhD thesis, Maastricht University, 2010.
Luis C Cobo, Charles L Isbell, and Andrea L Thomaz. Object focused q-learning for autonomous agents. In Proceedings of the 2013 international conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems, pp. 1061­1068. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2013.
Christoph Dann, Tor Lattimore, and Emma Brunskill. Unifying pac and regret: Uniform pac bounds for episodic reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5713­5723, 2017.
Carlos Diuk, Andre Cohen, and Michael L Littman. An object-oriented representation for efficient reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning, pp. 240­247. ACM, 2008.
Rachit Dubey, Pulkit Agrawal, Deepak Pathak, Thomas L Griffiths, and Alexei A Efros. Investigating human priors for playing video games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.10217, 2018.
Chelsea Finn and Sergey Levine. Deep visual foresight for planning robot motion. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2017 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 2786­2793. IEEE, 2017.
Meire Fortunato, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Jacob Menick, Ian Osband, Alex Graves, Vlad Mnih, Remi Munos, Demis Hassabis, Olivier Pietquin, et al. Noisy networks for exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.10295, 2017.
Marta Garnelo, Kai Arulkumaran, and Murray Shanahan. Towards deep symbolic reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05518, 2016.
Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Shie Mannor, Joelle Pineau, Aviv Tamar, et al. Bayesian reinforcement learning: A survey. Foundations and Trends R in Machine Learning, 8(5-6):359­483, 2015.
Ross Girshick. Fast r-cnn. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 1440­1448, 2015.
Carlos Guestrin, Daphne Koller, Chris Gearhart, and Neal Kanodia. Generalizing plans to new environments in relational mdps. In Proceedings of the 18th international joint conference on Artificial intelligence, pp. 1003­1010. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2003.
11

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Arthur Guez, David Silver, and Peter Dayan. Efficient bayes-adaptive reinforcement learning using sample-based search. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1025­1033, 2012.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dolla´r, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 2980­2988. IEEE, 2017.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.02298, 2017.
Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Horgan, John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, et al. Deep q-learning from demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03732, 2017.
Thomas Jaksch, Ronald Ortner, and Peter Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(Apr):1563­1600, 2010.
Nan Jiang, Alex Kulesza, Satinder Singh, and Richard Lewis. The dependence of effective planning horizon on model accuracy. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 1181­1189. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2015.
Michael Kearns and Satinder Singh. Near-optimal reinforcement learning in polynomial time. Machine learning, 49(2-3):209­232, 2002.
Michael Kearns, Yishay Mansour, and Andrew Y Ng. A sparse sampling algorithm for near-optimal planning in large markov decision processes. Machine learning, 49(2-3):193­208, 2002.
Michael J Kearns, Umesh Virkumar Vazirani, and Umesh Vazirani. An introduction to computational learning theory. MIT press, 1994.
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesva´ri. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In European conference on machine learning, pp. 282­293. Springer, 2006.
Brenden M Lake, Tomer D Ullman, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Samuel J Gershman. Building machines that learn and think like people. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40, 2017.
Ian Lenz, Ross A Knepper, and Ashutosh Saxena. Deepmpc: Learning deep latent features for model predictive control. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2015.
Lihong Li, Michael L Littman, and Thomas J Walsh. Knows what it knows: a framework for selfaware learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning, pp. 568­575. ACM, 2008.
Shie Mannor, Duncan Simester, Peng Sun, and John N Tsitsiklis. Bias and variance approximation in value function estimates. Management Science, 53(2):308­322, 2007.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529, 2015.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1928­1937, 2016.
Ian Osband and Benjamin Van Roy. Why is posterior sampling better than optimism for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.00215, 2016.
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via bootstrapped dqn. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 4026­4034, 2016.
Georg Ostrovski, Marc G Bellemare, Aaron van den Oord, and Re´mi Munos. Count-based exploration with neural density models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01310, 2017.
12

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. Yolo9000: better, faster, stronger. arXiv preprint, 2017. Melrose Roderick, Christopher Grimm, and Stefanie Tellex. Deep abstract q-networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.00459, 2017. Christopher D Rosin. Nested rollout policy adaptation for monte carlo tree search. In Ijcai, pp.
649­654, 2011. David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484­489, 2016. David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering chess and shogi by self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815, 2017. Alexander L Strehl and Michael L Littman. An analysis of model-based interval estimation for markov decision processes. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 74(8):1309­1331, 2008. Alexander L Strehl, Lihong Li, and Michael L Littman. Reinforcement learning in finite mdps: Pac analysis. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10(Nov):2413­2444, 2009. Richard S Sutton, David A McAllester, Satinder P Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 1057­1063, 2000. Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, OpenAI Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman, Filip DeTurck, and Pieter Abbeel. # exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2750­ 2759, 2017. William R Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3/4):285­294, 1933. Pedro A Tsividis, Thomas Pouncy, Jacqueline L Xu, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Samuel J Gershman. Human learning in atari. 2017. The´ophane Weber, Se´bastien Racanie`re, David P Reichert, Lars Buesing, Arthur Guez, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Oriol Vinyals, Nicolas Heess, Yujia Li, et al. Imagination-augmented agents for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06203, 2017.
13

